This video is brought to you by Blinkus first hundred people to go to
blinkus.com/biographics. We'll get one week to try it out for free.
You'll also get 25% off the cost of full membership.
If year one sets more on them in a bits
In the spring of 985,
80 a small fleet sets sale on a history making mission among the crew were
hundreds of men and women looking to start AF fresh to begin new lives far from
home. They took with them livestock, timber,
all of the things that need to establish themselves at the edge of the world.
It was a leap of faith, not just because of the treacherous voyage,
not just because they were attempting to found a colony where no one had ever
lived bit before. No,
it was because these people were placing not just their futures,
but their lives in the hands of a single man. His name was Eric, the red,
and he was destined to found Greenland's first nos settlements,
born to a criminal father in Norway. Eric had spent most of his life as a minor.
Nobody eeking out in existence on the edges of Iceland,
but then he got involved in a dispute and everything had changed banished from
his home.
Eric was forced to sail west in search of new lands only to wind up settling the
largest island of the mall.
It was 950 80 when Eric thought Valson was born in a place rogue
land in the Southwest of Norway,
at least we assume it was as you're about to see pretty much everything to do
with Eric. The Red's life involves a bunch of guesswork, a whole lot of caveats.
And the understanding that's anywhere up to 90% might just
be well Posman. Yeah,
that's because our hero today was born in a time and place in which complex
written records weren't yet widely used. Instead,
people relied on oral traditions telling each other stories, passing them down,
maybe subtly altering them with each telling famously.
This includes the sagas from where we get everything that we know about Eric,
the red, the problem, the saga of Eric,
the reds and the saga of the Greenlanders wasn't written down until something
like over 200 years since it died.
So rather than me going historians assume that,
or it suspected that every time I mention a fact, let's just agree.
Now that this entire episode comes with a massive caveat titled warning.
All of this could be absolute. Now, with that being said,
we do have an enough archeological evidence to say that Eric was a real person
and that his most famous deeds did really happen.
It's just where his personal life is concerned.
That things get frustratingly vague to return to our opening.
We commonly assume Eric was born in 950 because it matches up with the other
dates given in the sagas.
But we don't actually know this anymore than we know that he had the nickname at
Eric, the red,
which could be to do with the color of his hair or his legendary temper.
All we know for sure is what the sagas tell us that sometime around the nine
sixties, Eric and his father,
Thor vol arrived in Iceland after thal managed to get his band from Norway
likely for killing someone. If that's the case,
then exile in Iceland was certainly a fitting punishment. First settled,
roughly a century earlier.
Iceland had been one of the focal points of a great wave of north migration
brought on by political changes at home.
The migration had seen the north settle all over Northwest Europe from England
to Ireland, to the Shetland islands and pharaohs.
Iceland was simply the most distant lands that they colonized in this.
The north were helped by something known as the medieval warm period,
a fourth century summer holiday in which temperature spiked around Europe,
making even an island on the edge of the Arctic circle, easily habitable,
all told about 20,000 people would settle Icelands.
And that was a major problem.
The Eric and his par by the time they showed up in the nine sixties,
all the good land was already gone. Even the not so good lands,
the mediocre lands and the actually kind of sucky land had all been snapped up
the best Eric and Thorold could manage was the super crappy lands at
horns strand deer place of PO soil and a short growing season.
Clearly father and son were in trouble,
but they weren't the only ones who were going to have difficulties farming in
Iceland all across the island over grazing was driving down soil quality,
making life harder. So when Eric eventually comes to pictures,
Greenland's colony to the locals.
There's going to be a surprising number of people thinking, well, well,
it's gotta be a lot better than here, but look,
all of that is in the future for now, Eric. And so could do nothing,
but try to tend the unforgiving lands and hope that their lives would soon be
changed for the better Buckley. Eric wouldn't have to wait very long at all.
In a few short years, he was going to catch his first break.
Cause the breaks that would set him on the path to it's becoming one of the
greatest north explorers of all time.
In the end, Eric, the Redwood escape is miserable. Corner of horn, strand deer,
not through hard work, Chris, all she determination,
but by marrying upwards,
salt held was the order of a wealthy man who owned a swath of Hawk,
had Del Lura long valley.
The name of which can roughly be translated as valley of the Hawks.
After she married Eric,
a good old dad opened a corner of his estate for the couple to build their home
on Eric abandoned the islands north moved south and founded a small farm that he
called Eric study.
It was nothing fancy ologists on top of the F and founded to be on the small
side. But at least it was an area that was better suited to farming.
Unfortunately,
this lucky break was also accompanied by tragedy sometime around Eric's
marriage. His dad saw VO kick the bucket, the exact date in cause of death,
a run unknown.
All we know is that he exited the narrative before his son ever had a chance to
do anything of note. If he did leave a legacy,
it seems to have been Aing onto Erica knack,
forgetting banished from various places.
As we are about to see Eric and soils created quite the little BR,
they had three sons and one daughter,
the latter of whom some sources say was born to another woman that tur was
seeing.
There's not much point in us going into any detail on these kids with one
exception around nine 70 tho gave birth to a son that they called LA since
North's names were patron Nemick meaning they included the father's given name.
The boy's full name was LA Erickson and LA would soon grow up to rival his
father. As an Explorer father, Eric had actually really done any exploring yet.
He was too busy being a standard issue on Icelandic farmer,
raising his children quarreling with his neighbors and trying to keep his
servants in line.
It was these two last points that were about to turn everything upside down
around nine 80. Some of our strolls accidentally caused a landslide,
captured slaves or surfs thralls were basically people's proper seat.
So when their landslide damaged the farm of Eric's neighbor,
Val of Val of dealt with him, not as people,
but as things he dispatched his Kingsman, the delightfully named IOL,
the foul who slaughtered Theros and just like that,
IOF signed his own death warrant. Remember earlier when we said that Eric,
the reds nickname may have been due to his foul temper. Well,
this is the moment when we show you exactly why that might have been
rather than just go to the law.
Eric grabbed his own weapons marched right over to Val off's farm and
slaughtered I off the foul while this might sound like AIP attack killing today.
And Eric's time,
there was like going ballistic computing your neighbor because he scratched your
Carrolls were property dudes like now pretty dead or
people that meant legal proceedings being launched against Eric.
It meant being banished from the valley of Hawks' punishment and starting a new
life on the island of Oxy. Sadly for his family.
This was just the start of Eric's neighbor,
killing spree while building his new homestead, Eric Glen,
some seat posts to a local carved with Vikings and bulls and considered to have
mystic powers. These posts were hugely valuable.
Eric dad brought them all the way from Norway.
So when Eric asked for the seat posts back in 982, the neighbor was all like,
uh, actually that kind of mind now and well,
the outcome was he inevitable blinded with bright red rage E
stormed his neighbor's farm and to hook the seat posts by force.
Then he organized an ambush to attack the rival clan, killing the neighbors.
Two sons, the Icelands. This was the last straw. Eric was tried again,
found guilty again and banished again, only this time,
he wasn't just chucked out of his local area.
This time Eric would be exiled from the whole of Iceland.
Now we get back to our video in just a minute, but first,
a quick word from today's fantastic sponsor Blinkist. It's the heart of July,
which means that you're probably looking to check some books off your summer
reading list.
Few things are better than sitting in the park or maybe just lying on the beach,
cracking a good book that you've been looking forward to. Now,
if you want that same dopamine head of new information,
but without the hours of personal investment,
it takes to read something from cup to cover. Well,
that's where Blinkist comes in. It's a great app that offers easily digestible,
15 minute summaries of all of the best non-fiction books.
There's more than 3000 of them.
You can either read them or listen to the audio version personally by listen
about 90% of the time, just like a short little value packed podcast episode.
It's easier to fit into my day.
That way while doing mindless things or walking to work, you know,
the kind of everyday activities that you can listen to stuff during 14 million
active users are currently using blinkers to get the best insights and need and
information from thousands of books from self-help to business, to health,
whatever you're into, it's gonna be on there. For example,
if you're enjoying this video on Eric, the red, perhaps you'd enjoy sea power,
the history and geopolitics of the world's oceans by retired us Navy,
Admiral James, Dave rids. It's a 21 minute read.
Then you can move on to your next book just like that.
So if you're interested in learning big ideas and small packages,
head to blinkers.com/biographics in the first 100, we'll get one week to try it.
Blinkers free. You'll also get 25% off. If you on the form membership again,
seven day trial,
cancel it anytime at blinkers.com/biographics
Decades before Eric did for ism,
what Michael Douglas did for LA and falling down a guy called gun Bern off
Cracken found himself having a minor problem.
At some point in the late ninth or early 10th century gun born had been on his
way to Iceland.
When a giant storm blew up and sent him wildly off course at fair warning,
giant storms,
blowing random dudes of course is going to be something of a recurring theme due
days, video. Anyway, went gun born storm at last died down.
He SP a distant forbid coast.
It was the first sighting of Greenland in European history over the Halloween
decades, news of gun Born's bizarre adventure spread across Icelands.
By the time Eric was sentenced to three years,
aile the sighting of this distant land was widely known.
So decided to go and explore it. And to be clear, this absolutely nuts.
The Denmark straight separating Icelands in Greenland is a 700 mile death trap
frequently clogged with ice and plagued with thick fogs and dreadful storms.
And it's not like Eric had nowhere else to go. The pharaohs,
the Shetlands Ireland, England,
none of these places to the east and south of yet banned him, but for whatever.
And Eric at his heart set on this mysterious Western land in the spring of 982,
Eric,
his family FRS and a small group of friends departed Iceland on a three year
voyage,
they traveled in a ship called an NA sail powered alternative to the classic
north long ship that livestock traveled with him.
It could have been the end of Erics. The last that anyone saw of him,
instead it wounds up the ING is making the NA volume of the journey to
Greenland's finally sighting lands near what we today call the Amal Ford.
But because the approach was so blocked with ice,
Eric was forced to follow the coastline all the way around the Island's Southern
tip. What he saw on the Western coast was the best kind of shock.
Unlike the east Greenland's Western coast is comparatively hospitable.
There's more habitable land, easier approaches,
less of a sense that the ocean actively wants to kill. You.
It's been said for centuries,
air gave Greenland its name as a piece of propaganda,
a way of enticing settlers to this cold and remote place.
But green is also a pretty fair description of that Western coast,
for someone who just traversed 700 miles of frozen ocean,
it looked like a ver paradise.
The majority of Eric's first year was spent establishing a base at modern day
Cassar circuit temperate islands that would soon become the focal points of
Greenlands east settlement. As spring return,
as team began seriously explor the unknown lands,
taking trips further up the coast, driving deeper into the interior.
What they found was a surprisingly inviting world.
While inland was frozen Tundra,
there was a good 20 to 30 miles of Arab land clutching the Western coast.
The climate in these Fords was similar to icy. The soil was good to,
or at least as good as could be expected,
but while Eric had found a place capable of supporting life,
he never found any other humans.
Although indigenous peoples had previously settled this part of Greenlands by
Erics time, all their colonies had been long abandoned.
This wasn't an occupied place that colonists would've had to fight for.
It was truly virgining lambs, right? For the taking in 985,
Eric designed to do just that, that summer, he,
he took his boat and turned to Iceland,
but it wasn't settling back into his old life that was on Eric's minds. No,
he liked what he'd seen of. Greenland's likes the climate, the vegetation,
the open space. Most of all had liked the freedom,
the freedom to be someone important away from all these annoying laws about not
killing your neighbors. As he sailed away,
Eric explore that he had returned to Greenland and this time he'd bring enough
people with him to make it permanence.
While the name Greenlands might not have been pure marketing. There's no doubt.
Eric sold his new colony, like a PR master back in Iceland.
He told everyone who'd listened guys.
Have I ever got a great investment idea for you before installing the
Island's ease of living? It was a long shot pitch.
Shop sticks with me and move 700 miles across dangerous ocean. But for many,
it was also supremely tempting.
Remember the Iceland soil is in decline at this stage. Life is getting harder.
The hard enough to convince hundreds of people to roll everything on flame
head explorers, mad gamble. Finally,
some 14 to 15 winters before Christianity came to Icelands.
The sagas say that Eric was ready that year, anywhere between 25 and 35 ships.
The number varies depending on the source cast off into the frozen seas.
For those of us used to hearing about the colonization of the Americas, the,
to note an ever increasing mass of people that eventually just dominates
everything.
But the north experience in Greenlands was totally different at its absolute
height. Long after Eric's death.
It's estimated that the island was home to slightly over 2,500 people,
tiny fraction of the number living on Iceland in Eric's time.
The number was even his Greenlands consisted of maybe 350 people,
plus a whole bunch of livestock clinging to a tiny temperate zone on
the edge of a frozen wastelands colonists. Soon divided into two settlements.
The Eastern settlement centered arounds,
the Ford Eric had first occupied during exact Zile and the smaller Western S
settlement 240 miles north between the two tiny Hamlet sprang up a little more
than lone farms, deads, dotted along the coast.
Yet it would be a mistake to think farming was all the Greenland colonists did
while agriculture was an important part of their lives.
One which saw them push medieval farming to its limits in such high latitudes.
It certainly couldn't sustain them.
But one thing the growing season was brutally short for another samples show.
It probably took colonists a whole generation to adapt to the SAR conditions.
So how did they survive in this inhospitable worlds for that?
We need to look away from the land and to the water while it might not have
trees. One thing green England does have an abundance is seals pretty much all
excavations of old Greenland and middens or trash heaps have turned up seal
bones,
suggesting the colonists turn to hunting to supplement their diet from day one,
but rather than just grabbing any passing seal,
bashing its brains out and feasting on the BL the Greenlands did their hunting
in a surprisingly sustainable way.
Although Harbor seals.to the shores near their sediments,
the colonists seemed to have realized they could easily hunt these creatures to
extinction. So instead they targeted harp seals, which were harder to catch,
but existed in far greater numbers,
meaning their stock could be easily replenished.
It was some savvy forward thinking one that runs counter to the popular image of
Vikings as a bunch of drunk bearded slaughter machines, it also held Eric's new.
You colony survive long term from the 350 odd first settlers.
The Greenlands would quickly grow to number a thousand,
but just establishing one major colony. Apparently wasn't enough Eric,
within 15 years,
it soon have a sight set even further west on a place that you and I know,
not as Greenlands, but rather Canada.
Remember back when that random zoo got blown off course.
And we said it would become a theme in this video. Well,
time to make good on that promise. In the early years of Eric's colony,
a guy called Biani Hools set south Greenland only for surprise surprise a
massive storm to blur off course when the winds died down,
he and his group finally spotted lands,
but not land any Europeans had ever seen before the coast,
before them was heavily forested. Unlike Greenland's treeless Fords,
it was such an unexpected site.
The Bian refused to allow his men to land instead sailing up the coast,
pasted another land mass covered in ice before bearing east and returning to
Greenlands in doing so.
He missed out on his Johns to become the first European to set foot in north and
America today.
It's thought the icy hellscape Bian saw was BAFF in islands while the forest and
coasts were Newfoundlands and Labrador.
How do he agree to let his men go ashore?
Bani would probably now be starring in his own biographics instead of just
saling in the corner of someone else's video,
still his tale of yet another undiscovered world to the west sent shockwaves to
through Eric's colony and planted a seed in its ruler mind.
But before he could act on B's tip,
Eric needed to get Greenland up and running by now,
he was head of the Eastern settlement and living the life that has always
dreamed of he had a large home authority and acted like he was Lord of all that
heed, which we guess he technically was. However,
that didn't mean that Eric was free to do whatever he pleased Bley might have
been chief of Greenlands.
There was still someone Eric needed to stay on the good side of,
and that was the king of Norway while it was remote Greenland relied on trade
with other north territories in order to survive the colonists at stuff like
Ember,
they desperately needed to import while they also boasted one important export
ivory.
At the time ivory artifacts were big business and with large herds of walrus
sheltering in a bay 300 miles north of the Western settlement,
the Greenlands could easily call the market,
but opening a new trade ment keeping in the good graces of those back home
around 994 at Eric dispatched his son LA to Norway under instructions to
basically tell the king, Hey, the colony's doing great here. Some cool.
Please do not invade us. King enough.
Evidently liked what he heard because he agreed on one condition that LA tape
Christianity back to Greenland with him as a new converter was determined to
voice his religion on all Norseman everywhere.
The Icelands would be converted around 999.
OLF wanted to ensure Greenland's followed suit.
So when Blake finally returned home around 1,080,
it was supposedly with a priest at a side. We say supposedly,
because there are some serious doubts that the Greenland has converted.
So early one, commonly cited dates 10, 15 long after LA's journey to Norway.
The that's not the story.
The sagas tell in there telling they first convinced his mother sea hill to
accept Christ before embarking on a journey all up and down the Western coast,
converting the colonists with maybe one exception. Unlike thought hill.
Eric found Christianity about his advertising as watching Sam one,
blow their nose in public and then opened the tissue to examine its contents.
In one version told in the saga of Eric,
the red he held out for as long as possible,
only being baptized long after everyone else in another,
the version in the saga of the Greenlands, he went to his grave, stubborn pagan,
having never accepted Christ. If the latter is true,
it may well be because Eric had something else on his mind in a thousand day,
deep around the same time later returns. He now to his father,
that it had a grand's new idea.
The two of them would sail west and settle that new land mass that hay
had discovered together.
They'd be the first Europeans in history to set foot in north America
In the ends. Eric, the red just missed out on his,
wants to make history for the second time refusing to accompany his son on the
voyage west as with so much in today's tale,
the reasons are frustratingly vague.
One reason has it that Eric decided he was just too old.
Another that he decided to go and change his mind when he spotted bad Oman's in
another, he fell from a horse and injured himself on the day of departure,
forcing him to abandon the voyage.
The reason when LA set sail the head of 35 men,
Eric wasn't by his side for such a famous Explorer.
This must have seemed like a tragedy on his own history,
changing voyage Lakewood first land on BAFF in Ireland,
followed by heading south to overwind in Newfoundland,
the settlements he established there is known today as LA Medo and it
signifies the beginning of a great chapter in north history.
One which saw them set up the first European colonies in America.
But that's a tale for another time back in Greenlands and epidemic had broken
out among the colonists killing hundreds.
Although at least one saga says he survived. Eric.
The red is traditionally thought to have died in the outbreak around the year
1001,
whether he lived long enough to see his son again and hear tales of the strange
new land depends on which saga you read, whatever the truth of his death.
There's no doubting what Eric left behind. Despite the epidemic,
the Greenland colony was thriving far from being a frozen failure.
It was attracting scores of new saddle is every year drawn by the promise of
land freedom and riches. In fact,
the Greenlands colony would become so rich that according to a surviving
document from 1327,
it was soon producing more profit from ivory than all 4,000 Icelandic farms
could produce together. The date of that document too,
you should tell you something of Greenland's fate while LA's American colony
would last only a few winters.
North Greenland soon became a simple fact of geography.
The last known communication from the colony arrived in Iceland in 1424,
over four centuries after Eric's death,
in case he needed a reminding the United States so far survived for a little
over half that time, say what you like about Eric, the reds,
but he knew how to build a colony. That would last of course,
the Greenland settlements eventually laid out or were abandoned for reasons.
We're still not totally sure of the last evidence of any activity dates to
around 1450. After that, it would be another 300 years before Scandinavians.
Again, return to the frozen land today. Eric,
the reds lost his mantle as the founder of Greenlands.
While the Amy bestowed upon the islands survives modern inhabitants were almost
uniformly of Inuit descent, the Norse,
yet none of this detracts from his greatest achievement at a time when the
universe seemed to firmly star at Iceland's Western edge,
Eric rolled everything on a perilous voyage to an UN unknown land that he didn't
just survive,
but managed to establish a long lived colony is all sorts of admirable.
We may know little about his inner life today, or even what, what drove him.
But we do know that Eric,
the red was one of the era's most accomplished and most fascinating explorers
for that reason, if no other he's worthy of being remembered.
So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up button below. Don't forget to subscribe also.
Please do check out our fantastic sponsor Blinkist link below and thank you for
watch.
Let.